---
date: 2024-10-31
title: "Plugged into EU: the case of Apple’s USB-C switch and the Brussels Effect"
description: A look at how the EU's regulatory power compelled Apple to adopt USB-C, illustrating Brussels' growing influence in global tech standards and geopolitics.
---
Two years ago, the EU had passed a directive ensuring that all handheld mobile phones would come equipped with a USB-C receptacle by the end of 2024. Even the sleek-design enthusiasts at Apple could not escape the effect of this mandate. EU’s action was highly praised on the lines that this would make a single power-adapter compatible with all devices thereby reducing electronic waste and ensuring convenience for end users. While the world of tech enthusiasts was beaming at a shiny new USB-C port, this change was worthy of acknowledgment for another reason as well. It was an example of how the EU exercises its regulatory might.

Apple has been known to be a company that does not shy away from making design choices that are considered revolutionary. After the removal of the home button, and then the headphone jack, Apple’s proprietary lightning connector was widely considered to be the next in the line-of-fire. Many believed that the company would ditch the port in favour of another restrictive proprietary wireless charging tech. The later launched wireless puck confirmed that this would have been the trajectory if not for EU’s intervention. The EU’s legislative might is such that a company – which values more than the GDP of all but six countries – had to give-in to the mandates of the regulatory influence.

The resultant change from EU’s insistence on USB-C has no been limited to implementation only in Europe. This is because despite their size and potential, companies still want to maintain standardised production norms across the globe. Even if the standards that EU creates are the strictest in the world, they will still have the potential to become universal. This case brings to light what Prof. Anu Bradford refers to as the ‘Brussel’s effect.’ Talking about the effect, Prof. Bradford had hinted that – traditional ways of looking at power, and understanding it merely in terms of military strength is a limited view. A wider, more unorthodox view of power would incorporate the ability to set trends for law making worldwide.  

While the decline in EU’s influence keeps making headlines in the circles of geopolitical enthusiasts, the real power that it exercises is its ability to create and manipulate the rules of the game. The effect is real and it is shaping how international companies’ function. This is the Brussels’ effect. What this essentially means is that without depending on cooperation from other countries or international organisations, the EU can singlehandedly manipulate the trajectory of international markets through creation of regulations that are legally enforceable only in their own sovereign territory. Promulgation of their own regulations leads to ‘Europeanisation’ of many aspects of global commerce. What is remarkable here is the fact that other countries or corporations are virtually coerced into accepting the regulations that the EU standardises. The presence of a large and resource fertile consumer base makes companies bow to the standards set by the EU, and these standards are most of the times, the most stringent ones internationally. Meaning that the question of their applicability elsewhere is already sorted.

As global politics remains a dominion of geopolitical competition between major powers like USA and China, the EU’s regulatory influence offers a different form of power projection. It is a means which while subtler, is still powerful in its own ways. Despite Apple’s initial resistance, the regulations were able to coerce it into compliance internationally. While their marketing geniuses might paint their moves in colours of innovation and environmental sustainability, the truth remains that the switch to USB-C was catalysed by the regulatory requirements of the EU. It is a clear example of how EU controls the international regulatory landscape and wields the power to influence global corporations and markets. Through its regulatory abilities, the EU has carved its own space in the international fora and remains a key player on the global stage shaping the world through its rules.